Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by a return guest guest, Doctor
Matty Haru. He's professor of philosophy at Aalto University
School of Business in Finland. Last time we talked
about his book on antenatalism and today we're talking
about his latest book, Pure Cloning. So, Mati, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to have you
on again.
Thank you, thank you very much. Always a pleasure
to be here.
So start by telling us then, what is pure
and in pure cloning?
Well, cloning as you mean means producing genetic copies
or genetic neo copies, there's some mitochondria, whatever, somewhere
in the often of an organism, so copies. And
when people started to talk about human cloning 50,
60 years ago, uh, they also talked about genetic
enhancements. About making people, people better, either by selection
before the new individual even exists, or by gene
technology when they do exist. And this is what
Tua Takala and I uh call in our book,
impure cloning. The book's name is pure cloning, but
the impure cloning is cloning mixed with something else.
And most debates about cloning. Have at least an
element of this impurity somehow ingrained in them. Now,
our innovation, so to speak, is to remove this
impurity from the discussion and talk about cloning and
only about cloning, and without any selection or, or
genetic manipulation. Just about producing a genetic copy or
copy of an existing human individual and this is
what we call pure cloning. So, To summarize, pure
cloning is just cloning, impure cloning is cloning plus
something else.
OK. Uh, AND in the book, you go through
different kinds of objections to human cloning because it's
human cloning that we're focusing on mostly here. Start
by telling us about the theological objections. What is
this kind of objection?
Well, different world religions have different attitudes on, on
human clothing and to name a few, there's Buddhism,
there's Islam, and Catholic Christianity and conservative Protestant Christianity.
These are, these have a negative view on, on
human clothing. They are saying, no, no, shouldn't do
that. And then we have Hinduism, Judaism, moderately Protestant
Christianity who I say, um, have a moderately cautious
view and they are saying, well, maybe. If, if
you prove this and that and the other. And
the theological objections typically emphasize the aspect of playing
God in one way or or another. So applying
complicated technology to reproduction and in this case, human
reproduction is too dangerous for fallible, weak, uh, idiotic
human beings to, to handle. Something will go wrong,
they, they say. If not concretely, then at least
humankind will be. Uh, EXPOSED to hubris, the excessive
pride and a deceptive sense of control. So this
is the argument from playing God. It doesn't really
need to have anything to do with God except
that God, uh, as a concept is an all-knowing,
all powerful being and fallible human beings are not.
Now, there's a funny episode early on uh when
in 1997, the Roman Catholic Church seemed to be
saying for a while, for a short while, that
human clones would have no souls, and that's why
we shouldn't uh make them. Uh, THIS was a
view that was publicized, but, and then the church
retracted the view almost immediately. But uh that uh
episode. In the history of the ethics of cloning
inspired to. The main author in, in here and
me to write and produce a rock opera called
Playing God, uh, which we wrote and produced and
performed all over including in the end in an
off off-Broadway musical theater, the K Playhouse in, in
uh Manhattan in 2015 to a full house, by
the way. So cloning has been good to us.
Uh, SO, apart from the theological objections, what is
the legal status of cloning? I mean, what does
the law have to say about it?
Negatively, uh, the, the cloning of non-human beings was
not, is not particularly restricted. The list of mammals
that have been cloned when I last checked included
at least cows, mice, rats, goats, pigs, rabbits, cats,
horses, and dogs, and then when you go down
the complexity ladder of, of uh beings, and other
animals and organisms are fairly free. Yeah, nobody bats
an eyelid if they are. Uh, COPIED and, and
cloned and produced. It's the cloning of humans that
seems to be the, the problem. And human cloning
by the nuclear transfer method. So the nuclear transfer
method is merging a nucleus from, from one organism
with an egg from which the nucleus has been
removed of another organism, putting them together and um
doing something magical and, and then it comes alive
and starts developing that, that combination. And that has
been uh clo human cloning by nuclear transfer method.
It has been legally prohibited around the world since
1997. There was a flurry of uh legislation saying
that we shouldn't do that. Nobody knew how to
do it, but, uh, exactly with humans, but it
was prohibited all the same. And that, of course,
was the year when Dolly the sheep was cloned
in Scotland and then well give simply just woke
up to the possibility of a similar. Attempt in
humans, but to your question, the legal status of
human cloning, not permitted. No, no.
Mhm. Uh, IN the book, you also go through
three main kinds of theoretical moralities, namely, utilitarian, the
ontological, and teleological moralities. Tell us first about utilitarian
moralities.
I'm just thinking about, uh, are we making it
sound like a, a moral philosophy 101 here? Well,
perhaps we are, perhaps that's just, that's OK, a
little repetition for everyone. So the classical utilitarian rule
is that we should always aim to maximize good
and it, it's measurable good. I mean, any moral
theory could say good, but this is uh somehow
measurable well-being or pleasure or, or something like that.
And now legislation on social policy and even public
opinion insofar as we can control it should follow
this principle of maximizing good. And this means that
when, when we are doing that in legislation and
social policy in particular, then the excluded alternatives are
Arbitrary dictatorship, authoritarian measures, we shouldn't do something just
because a dictator is saying so, or we shouldn't
be doing them on sentimental responses. So democracy won.
So in, in that end uh with unpredictable consequences
is, is, uh, not allowed within the utilitarian. It's
a very rational thing, just maximize the, the well-being
and, and be done with it. Now, the maximization
of good or well-being should, however, and this is,
this is the second main tenet of utilitarians. It
should be moderated by what is called the harm
principle. It says that we should not interfere with
one another's freedom unless the exercise of that freedom
would be harmful to someone else. I shouldn't hold
your hand from moving unless it is approaching my
nose and, and then I can stop it. I
can interfere with your freedom if you're about to
harm me. Now, if both of these requirements are
taken seriously, then we have a morality or political
ideology that states two things actually, and in this
order. First, don't harm anyone else, including your citizens
if you are a legislator, unless they are harming
others. And secondly, and only secondly, promote everybody's good
where it can be done without causing harm. So
that's utilitarianism for you.
And among the utilitarians we have specifically the bio
utilitarians, which I think are the ones that would
apply the most in the case of cloning specifically.
So what are the bio utilitarians and what kinds
of arguments do they have in favor of cloning?
Well, the name by the utilitarian can be applied
to philosophers who, uh, first of all, reject traditional
and sentimental reactions against new technologies. That would be
the, uh, what the first principle of utilitarianism rules
out, but who also argue that technologies should be
allowed and even encouraged because of the benefits that
they can bring. We'll get back to that can.
Now, genetic manipulation can lead to finding a cure
for cancer. Human cloning can lead to advances in
reproductive autonomy. People who who cannot have children of
their own now could perhaps clone themselves or their
partners or, or, or someone to have these children,
perhaps uh their themselves or their partners if they
wanted to have biological replicas of themselves, whatever. Now,
as long as this is physically dangerous, clones have
health problems or cloning is problematic, uh, technically, it
should not be done according to by your utilitarians.
But as soon as the procedure can be made
safe, then it should be permitted because otherwise it
would just be uh authoritarian or sentimental uh objections
to it. So harm to traditional values or outraged
feelings of the citizens, which some people think are
good legal arguments for bio utilitarians, they, they have
no value. They are not admissible as evidence.
And what are the main challenges then to the
bio utilitarian analysis?
It is mainly the frequent use of the word
can. It's, it's a question of modality. It's not
that it is or it should be, it is
that it, it can be. Technologies can have good
applications. They can benefit humanity, they can be safe.
What are they? So those who advocate uh a
little bit more caution say that we should know
more before we launch into dangerous experiments. And my
co-authorua Talla has, has given a name for the
bio utilitarian ethos here. It can be called the,
the hopeful principle. Now, from environmental policies, as you
know, we all know, uh it's opposite number, which
is the precautionary principle, and the precautionary principle is
saying, if in doubt, don't do it. But the
hopeful principle turns this around and says if there
is hope, do it. So, and this is what
bio utilitarians regularly stand by. If it can cure
cancer, then who cares about possible dangers? And the
critics of bio utilitarians, of course, point, point out
that this approach is a little bit uh reckless
for, for that test.
So I asked you, when it comes to utilitarianism,
I asked you about cloning in general, but when
it comes to pure cloning specifically, is there a
positive utilitarian case for it?
There is a positive uh utilitarian case. In the
book, we use uh with Tua, we use, uh,
an example that we invented in the aftermath of
lolly's cloning 30 years ago now, uh, soon. Uh,
A couple loses their child horrible accident or something
like that. They cannot have children of their own
anymore. Something happens to reproductive organs in, in that
same accident. Would it be wrong of them to
clone the lost child and have their child back?
Uh, VERY sentimental, very, uh, appealing. Uh, MANY people
think that the couple now should have the, even
if they, uh, on technical grounds, all the cloning
is wrong, they would say that, oh, it would
be so wonderful if they had this child. And
if it's not wrong, then that's your positive utilitarian
case for pure cloning. There's no genetic enhancement involved,
just the creation of the new or whatever individual.
So we've talked about utilitarianism now to get into
the ontology and specifically can and the ontology. Does
it have arguments in favor or and against cloning
or simply arguments against it?
Uh, IT has both. The main Kian Kantian rule
is that you should always respect humanity in yourself
and in others. So treat humanity as an end
in itself and never just as a means. And
that's the rule. And from there on, all hell
breaks loose and, and everything is, is interpretation, you
know, how do you treat humanity as an end
exactly and how do you treat humanity as a
means in yourself and in others. So there are
many, many readings of that. Now, many can ethicists
believe that producing a child by cloning would mean
treating it as a mere means. The child would
just be an instrument for the parents to have
offspring and If it's, uh, particularly if it's impure
cloning offspring whose features and characteristics they would know
in, in advance, so that's, that's uh manipulation in
there too. Some permissive Kians believe that the rules
should be applied a little more leniently and they
say that. But hang on, the interpretation of the
principal parents do not treat a child only as
a means to their own ends if they simultaneously
wish and expect and and hope that the child
will come to have a good life of its
own independently.
So before we get into teleological moralities, I have
sort of a more general question in regards to
the clash between consequentialists and the ontological philosophers, uh,
is it still visible in today's debates?
I think it is and, and this all started
already in the 1960s. So gene science began to
emerge and ethicists. HAD to say something about it.
We always have to say something about everything. Now,
utilitarian or consequentialist philosopher said, good, good, go ahead.
And then Cantiiano the ontological philosopher said back backstop
at once. And this distinction uh is still very
much alive. Utilitarians will, as a rule have unquestioningly
permissive views uh on cloning, and Kantians will have
more restrictive views on it, of course, there is
variation, but that's the general rule. And this difference
is also often linked to the liberal conservative dividing.
ETHICAL and political ideologies.
So when it comes now to teleological moralities, since
people are probably more familiar with utilitarian and the
ontological moralities, tell us first what are teleological moralities.
OK, so now we come to the uh moral
philosophy 101, part, part 3. Part one, utilitarians are
concerned about consequences, uh, how much well-being or, or
bad for you, it will, uh, it will produce.
Kantians are concerned about sticking to reason principles like
the humanity principle, always treat humanity as an end.
Now, teleological, um, and this is the oldest moral
theory in European moral philosophy. Mostly Aristotelian ethicists are
concerned about what is natural or normal and right
for the, for the species we are talking about.
And for humankind, they often say it is natural
and normal and right for the species to try
to survive, find nutrition and shelter. Have children, raise
your children to continue the family line. And that
is natural, and it's natural, it's normal. It is
also natural and normal and right to act according
to your, your reason. But the dictates of reason,
um, since Aristotle are basically essentially the same as
these dictates of our, our bodily nature. And now
in bioethics, the most popular uh teleological approach is
neo-Tomism. That's the official morality of the, and philosophy
of the Roman Catholic Church, and it is 1/19
century formulation of the philosophies of Aristotle and Thomas
Aquinas.
And and which kinds of theological moralities apply to
debate surrounding cloning then?
An alternative to, to neotomism would be uh virtue
ethics, uh, which would be more directly derived from
Aristotle's thinking. This would be the Nico Mark and
ethics uh directly read, and this would emphasize the,
the golden mean doing everything in good proportion, good
proportion, not too much, not too little, just the
right amount would be the golden mean. And this
approach has not to, to our knowledge, been fully
developed in the context of, of cloning because the
debate has been dominated by neotoism man official or
semi-official applications and in this, the verdict is ultimately
made actually by some kind of the council of
the wise. I mean, it's, the logic is that
ordinary people, you and I cannot make considered judgments
in difficult cases. Uh, WE don't know all the
facts, but more importantly, uh, we don't know all
the moral factors that are relevant to the case,
and we don't know how to apply them, and,
and so. I'm trying not to be Impolite or
unfriendly, but, but the, the impression I'm getting is
that, that only, only a fully credited neoimist philosopher
is up to the challenge.
Uh, AND what kinds of arguments do these teleological
moralities produce in favor or against pure cloning?
Well, the ones we know, know of our neotomists
and according to them, cloning humans uh would be
wrong, and this has something to do with playing
God again, or trying to exercise too much control
in reproduction or something. We explain all that in,
in detail in, in the book. So that would
be the neoomist thing. The virtue ethical alternative would
be to, to think, and this would be interesting
to develop, it would be to think in terms
of excesses and deficiencies and the golden mean. I
mean, to ask questions like, do we fear cloning
too much? Or are we not being cautious enough
about, about it? Do we fear it too little?
And if either of these is the case, then
in the original Aristotelia virtue ethical model, those are
vices, yeah. Doing an emotional reaction of the wrong
type and cloning would be uh vicious or wrong.
But then, of course, if you could prove that
cloning is the golden mean between too much fear
and, and too little fear, then it would be
virtuous and, and right. Well, it has not been
developed and our main objection in the book is
uh to, to both of these approaches is That
they are not transparent or or understandable. The council
may have made this decision or that uh decision,
but why did they make it? If, if I
cannot understand it, it cannot be right.
So we've talked about theoretical moralities and now I
would like to get into ideological rationalities and in
the book you talk about two different sets of
four principles and I would like to start with
the Georgetown principles that, that include beneficence, non-malleficence, autonomy
and justice. So could you explain each of them?
Yes, in the 1970s, uh, ethicists and, and biomedical
researchers in the United States decided that they, they
want to encapsulate or collect together all moral concerns
into a set of simple rules that researchers and,
and medical professionals could then use. And the first
rendition were the Beaumont principles. Originally, there were only
3 of them and then they grew into 4.
And now Georgetown University philosophers Tom Bum, the Canon.
And James Childress, a utilitarian, they put their heads
together and they formulated the set, which is now
known as the four principles of bioethics, the ones
that you mentioned, beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy and justice. Now,
uh, beneficence and non-mallefience were together as a utilitarian
principle in the Beaumont principle still, but then Um,
B and Childers decided that it makes more sense
to talk about not harming separately and then benefiting
separately, which I think makes good sense as I
explained, utilitarianism does make sense. And now Bum and
Childres originally argued that these principles can be based
on All valid moral theories by which they meant
the all the the can and and the utilitarian
theories, but they then Perhaps some friends whispered in
the ears this Aristotelian approaches, as well. Uh, uh,
SO they, they included the Aristotelian approach and then
they diluted, diluted, diluted the theoretical content and ended
up saying 20 years ago, uh, and that the
pri the principles that they have formulated, they reflect
a shared universal common morality, which means that every
one of us believes in them. There have been
objections to that one.
And based on these Georgetown principles, how should cloning
be approached and can we derive both arguments in
favor and against it from these principles?
Yes, there would be arguments both for and against.
Now many things here depend on the facts and,
and on the interpretation. Now, does cloning produce a
benefit? Is it important enough? Would it harm those
creative? Would it harm some others? Would it promote
autonomy? Would it violate autonomy? Would it be equitable
unfair, or would it be unfair? And so on
and so forth. So the background ideology of the
Georgetown principles and the Beaumont principles before that, uh,
that the background is liberal and outcome oriented, now
liberal in the sense of uh promoting freedom, not,
not liberal in the current American sense when it
means socialism or something awful like that social responsibility.
Uh, AND this sort of this background guides the,
the application to real life cases. The result for
the decades has been that autonomy, the freedom to
choose will get emphasized in this. Autonomy will be
the first principle, the first among equals, uh, as
long as no one comes to direct and concrete
harm, autonomy and freedom to rule and No, still,
uh. 30 years on cloning as a technology is
still unsafe. Um, AS far as we know, uh,
so the current verdict still is don't do it,
but with the proviso that once it is not
dangerous anymore, then the situation can be reassessed and
if people's autonomy says We, we'd like to do
it and if there's no clear harm that we
can predict coming out of it, then we should
do it. So the conclusion resembles the one that
was fixed by the bio utilitarian. So, so they
go very much hand in hand in, in this
particular case.
And then an alternative to the Georgetown for principles
is the Barcelona Declaration. What is that?
Well, already in the 1990s, many of us in,
in Europe and in Latin America and Asia and
Africa were getting frustrated and, and tired and bored
with the Georgetown principles. They were so obviously born
in the United States. They were so obvious liberal
in their. Uh, um, THEN understanding of in the
North American sense and capitalism and consumerism friendly that,
that we said, no, no, no, we want something
more. And some of us wanted uh more social
responsibility, others wanted more respect for traditional values, and
still others wanted some deeper philosophical reflection. Um, BY
this time, uh, which Childers were saying that it's
a common morality and you cannot argue with that,
and we said, yes, we are philosophers, we can
argue with anything. So a group of uh European
ethicists at this point managed to get somehow funding
from the European Commission to produce an alternative to
the Georgetown principle, and the result then of the
34 years of work. 20 people all together and
all the people they solicited to hell, and the
result was the Barcelona Declaration, uh, published in 2000
and defined a new set of rules and that
was less liberal in, in that sense, less utilitarian,
less individualistic, and it had more emphasis on the
ideals of communality and spirituality and the intrinsic morality
of human actions.
And uh as in the case of the Georgetown
principles, the Barcelona Declaration also includes 4 main principles,
that is autonomy, dignity, integrity, and vulnerability. Could you
explain them?
Yes, well, autonomy in this set of rules, it's,
it's not the consumer's freedom to choose anymore. It
is in this set of rules, it's inseparable from
dignity. Now we are working more uh in, in
a Kantian framework in, in line with the Kantian
humanity principle, our autonomy as rational beings is the
basis of our human dignity. And that in turn
is inviolable as a gift from God or nature,
and we don't have to think about God or
nature literally. It's, it's just a figure of speech.
It's, it's a given. It's something that we, we
haven't made our ourselves. That's the important bit of
the combination of autonomy and dignity now. Now, the
principle of, of integrity, the third one, it posits
that we are not purely intellectual or rational beings.
So this is going a step. Further from, from
the Kantian thing, uh, the standard cri critique of
Kantian morality is that it's too intellectual, too cerebral,
too brain-oriented or too, too, well, too rational. And
now integrity is saying that, that we have a
body or to, to say in another way, we
are a body. So we are a body, a
given material essence, a thing. And this thing also
has to be respected and it has to be
respected as diligently as, as our free choices. So
it's not only about consumer choices. If we are
making the wrong consumer choices, then someone wiser than
us can in the name of our integrity, say
that we are doing the wrong choice and prevent
us from doing it. So that's respect for our
persons transcends our own volition, to put it technically.
Now, vulnerability brings new autotomism into, into the model
in a way that I don't understand, but I
can explain it. People are vulnerable and the Georgetown
reaction would be to remove the vulnerability. Oh, you're
vulnerable. Oh, let me, let me take care of,
let me, let me cure your wounds, so make
sure that you don't hurt, hurt yourself anymore, but
not so in the Barcelona Declaration because it, it's
based on the, the neo doistic idea that we
must recognize human frailty, human weakness, and we must
embrace it, not try to get rid of it.
So how do these Barcelona Declaration principles apply to
thinking about pure clothing?
I cannot say for sure how exactly the proponents
of the principles would apply them. Uh, I'm not
one of the council of the wise, but the,
the case against the human cloning often seems to
be based on the impure dimensions, the assumption that
the new individuals would be improved or enhanced somehow
in the, in the process. Now, in the case
of pure cloning, the problem could be that the
individuals born. WOULD in a sense have pre-lived lives.
They would live in the shadow of, of uh
the, the earlier ones, so to speak. Their futures
would be known to others in a way that,
that their lives shouldn't be, be known. This is
now assuming that a person has already lived a
full life for, for at least some time, and
now we know what Sicknesses they will face and,
and how they will develop and so on. And
a person's life according to this kind of thinking,
uh should be an unknown mysterious gift, as I
said, uh, and not to build any strawman here,
the, the birth of one clone would not be
the end of the world. I mean, yes, the
Roman Catholic Council, uh, inadvertently said that clones would
not have souls. They, they retracted from, from that
one. It, it's not about one clone. One clone
will not uh uh explode our democratic way of
thinking or, or our religion or, or anything. It,
it is the Increasingly technological reifying instrumentalizing nature of
this kind of reproduction that is uh in court
here that, that is what is blamed. It's a,
it's a critique of modernity, really.
And one final approach that you talk about in
your book has to do with feminist bioethics. What
is that?
Well, we don't actually go into contemporary feminist thinking
at, at all, not being experts in the, in
the field, our fear. WAS that we make a
horrible mess of, of it. And instead, we cited
some historical examples and used them to Illustrate, throw
light on the, on the case of pure cloning.
And one example that we used was Mary Mary
Shelley's story of Doctor Frankenstein and his infamous creation.
And as we point out, the monster, monster here
is not the creature like in all the movies,
but Frankenstein himself because he creates this A child
of his and then uh notices that it's ugly
and then runs away in, in horror and abandons
his child when it turns out to be ugly.
So, on the monster is Frankenstein, uh, not having
a child of, of his liking and then turning
away from it. Now, anyway, the process is, is
faintly analogical to cloning. There's a collection of body
parts like in, uh, we have the, the one
nucleus. And uh for Doctor Frankenstein collects body parts
from morgues and, and medical operation theaters and, and,
and uh graveyards and, and what have you. So
that's one part of the thing. And then there's,
there's the other part of body part which uh
in the case of uh nuclear transfer clothing is
the nucleus which has been removed from, from one
egg, and then they are put together like Dr.
Frankenstein does, then something magical happens. Uh, ELECTRICITY has
been suggested in, in the movies and electricity is
what does the trick in nuclear transfer clothing, so
boom, and then we have a new, new indi
individual there. And now this We are sort of
arguing with Toya in the book, uh, is, could
be the basis of a, of a feminist critique.
You know, the feminist critique could be saying that
women as a creative force are now forgotten totally
in this process, uh, and then the technology that
is used instead of uh letting women do the
thing. Technology can produce only only monsters when the
female uh creative forces or something like that.
Yeah, I understand. So, uh, I have just one
last set of two questions regarding the or the
potential relationship between cloning or pure cloning more specifically
and reproduction in general. So, do the arguments against
pure cloning also apply to reproduction in general?
Uh, YES, they do. And, and, and this is
the, this is actually the hidden message of the,
of the book. You see all this slay of
hand talk about cloning for all that, this is,
it's real point, the real point of the book
is uh that a rejection of pure cloning is
at the same time, also a rejection of all
reproduction, all childbearing. So the endless debates on, on
the nuclear transfer method and rogue scientists trying to
use it on humans and dignity and autonomy and
integrity, they wouldn't have motivated Toyami to, to write
the book. We've been doing this since Dolly, uh
there's nothing new under, under the sun in there,
but our genius master stroke. That um uh was
uh confining the discussion to pure cloning and that's
our key and that gave us the strength to,
to try once again. Now, forget about the genetic
enhancements and other extras, just talk about cloning as
any reproduction as the image, an image of, well,
I can say the image of all reproduction. Now,
the, the best, hardest to refute arguments against pure
cloning, they always center around the ideas of mastery
and manipulation. So it would be wrong to put
other human beings in a situation where they are
at the mercy of their masters and manipulators. And
in the case of impure cloning, the argument is
that the selection, do, do, do, I'll take this
not that, uh, or enhancement, I will mold it
in my own image. They are the main culprits.
And if you choose your cloned children and change
its genetic uh characteristics for the better, you'll become
their. Technological overlord, uh, and you shouldn't do that.
But in the case of pure cloning, the role
of technology in that sense is eliminated. It's just
you and your, your child, whatever the details of
the, of the child's coming to existence. Now, if
the argument then persists, then bringing someone into being
without their permission, without their consent is wrong. And
that's then where you have it. The, the case
of pure cloning shows that this is not about
cloning at all. It's about bringing people into this
world. The same arguments apply. You should, if you
are prepared to reject cloning, your cloning, you should
be prepared to reject all human reproduction. And the
funny thing here is that the arguments against pure
cloning, the ones that survive liberal and moderate objections
are quite conservative and stem from distinctly pro-natalist views.
So, neoomism is, is a notable example. So here
we have, we have proven that, that the Catholic
Church is actually against all uh having children's and
the Catholic Church has an antenatalist agenda after all.
Which means that we must have twisted the words
somehow to reach this indisputable antenatalist conclusion, but When
you're writing a book like that, you do it
so tightly that I, I cannot honestly see where,
where we went wrong. I, I mean, we, we
must have gone wrong somewhere, but I don't know
where. So I'm waiting eagerly for people to, to
read the book and tell me what, what went
astray.
Yeah, but the, but then I mean, to uh
try to establish a link. I, I guess that
to a certain extent you've already established this link
there, but to try to establish a link to
the topic that we covered, that was the central
topic of our previous conversation. How does this all
tie to antenatalism then?
Well, this is the connection to antenatalism. Now it,
it, if, if you are arguing against pure cloning
and if you are saying that it doesn't matter
whether there are any enhancements or any selection or
anything, if you are just saying that you shouldn't,
even if it can be made safe, you shouldn't
produce children in this way. Then what is the
difference from there to, to any other? I mean,
you can, you can slide down the scale from
cloning to the use of in vitro fertilization to
the, to the use of, of an emergency room
for deliveries for this, that, that, that, that, and
then when all the technology, the medical technology is
gone, what you have there is the baby, and,
and that was the forbidden thing in here.
Right. OK, great. So the book is again, pure
cloning. I'm leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview as well as a link
to our first talk and Mati, apart from the
book, where can people find your work on the
internet?
I'm, I'm thinking that the best place, uh, these
days is the exploring antenatalism podcast. Mhm.
OK. I will also link to it in the
description and thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's always
a pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you, always happy to be here. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrook
field governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro
and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallidrianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.